# SL-Dataset-Repository-
Bangla, being the fifth most spoken language in the world has its own distinct sign language with two methods (one-handed and two-handed) of representation. However, a standard automatic recognition system of Bangla sign language (BdSL) is still to be achieved. Though widely studied and explored by researchers in the past years, certain unaddressed issues like identifying unseen signs and both types of BdSL or lack of evaluation of the models in versatile environmental conditions demarcate the real-world implementation of the automatic recognition of BdSL. To find a probable solution to the shortcomings in the existing works, this paper proposes two approaches based on conventional transfer learning and contemporary Zero-shot learning (ZSL) for automatic BdSL alphabet recognition of both seen and unseen data. The performance of the proposed system is evaluated for both types of Bangla sign representations as well as on a large dataset with 35,149 images from over 350 subjects, varying in terms of backgrounds, camera angle, light contrast, skin tone, hand size, and orientation. For the ZSL approach, a new semantic descriptor dedicated to BdSL is created and a split of the dataset into seen and unseen classes is proposed. Our model achieved 68.21%, 91.57%, and 54.34% of harmonic mean accuracy, seen accuracy, and zero-shot accuracy with six unseen classes respectively. For the transfer learning-based approach, we found pre-trained DenseNet201 architecture to be the best performing feature extractor and Linear Discriminant Analysis as the best classifier with an overall accuracy of 93.68% on the large dataset after conducting quantitative experimentation on 18 CNN architectures and 21 classifiers. The satisfactory result from our models supports its very probative potential to serve extensively for the hearing and speaking impaired community.

The contributions of this paper are:
• We introduce and formulate the problem of Bangla sign alphabet recognition using ZSL.

• A novel ZSL semantic attribute representation for BdSL based on hand active degrees of freedom (DoF), orientation, view, and position is proposed.

• We propose a seen/unseen split of the dataset for the ZSL approach.

• We develop a transfer learning based model that recognizes both one-handed and two-handed BdSL alphabets.

• For the one-handed system, we compile a large-scale dataset that comprises of five distinct datasets: one of which is developed by us and the rest are available on request or open for public. We evaluated our model on this dataset and made this available at GitHub to facilitate future researches in this domain.
